---
layout: post
title: Passion Shock
category: stories
---


"It won't hurt, will it?"
The moment came back again and again.

"Absolutely not, Mr. Nelayte, we guarantee it!", the operator had said, marking his words with a comfortingly self-assured smile hiding beneath his mustache.

The event itself had happened 3, no 4, months ago, yet Fil Nelayte still continued to play it back again and again in his mind.
The walls were colored a nauseating white: the white-yellow of milk gone sour. And the smell! The odors of Zilcex, the brain-numbing anesthetic which had made neurosurgery practical, revolved in the room. The sweet but awfully unpleasant scent could not be avoided.

Fil cringed: he hated that smell. This small movement brought him back to reality.

He was in a small room containing a painting of Vivaldi holding his violin, a little cabinet, a relatively small desk, and a chair (on which he currently sitting). Still not having fully emerged from the flashback, he found himself staring intently at his desk. There wasn't much there, to be sure: a few scattered journals, one or two scientific papers on the brain, a few pens, a digital clock, and, of course, his brainlet.

The brainlet is, by now, a pretty established medium of computing.

It was bound to happen, given the explosion of neuroscience after all the synapses in a human brain were mapped by the Human Brain Project (widely reported as "The Genome Project of the 23rd century" by the media). Working from the mapping, scientists figured out how to make the brain do pretty much anything. First emotions, then memories were manipulated. As research progressed, they found ways to trick the senses and cause hallucinations.

From this, the Brain Helmet, commonly referred simply as "brainlet", was born. The device looks relatively simple: a cap shaped to fit a specific person's head. However, beneath that cap lies impressive complexity. When worn and switched on, the brainlet sends carefully calculated shocks to the brain in order to trigger hallucinations, thereby causing the user to perceive (and possibly, feel or hear) digital data right in the room. It was a risky device to use at first, overwhelming the users with a frenzy of colors, touch, and sound whenever it crashed (which happened rather often, too). Nevertheless, as development stabilized over the last 30 years, the brainlet became safe enough for the general public to use daily.

Thusly, Fil put on his brainlet (shaped like a beret). Immediately, he was surrounded by an array of colorful icons. He opened up his research: an in-depth study of autism by looking at synapse maps of affected patients vs non-affected. All around him, graphs and diagrams of the maps appeared. So, he set to work. As he analyzed data and correlated patterns, the thrill of research filled his mind. He even felt a rising joy as he worked.

<< Undeserved happiness >>, he thought, << but happiness nonetheless >>.
Eventually, he grew tired. His drowsy mind escaped from work by looking at reality but found nothing there.

Just silence. Silence!

The operating room had been silent. It had him feel uncomfortable. What's more, the operator, with his ever discerning eyes, had sensed the insecurity. Fil remembered that well: the man's doubtful expression haunted him in the months to come.
Why had the man stayed silent, why had he not questioned him further?
And why had he himself not uttered a word? Why? Why?? Why?!!!
Thus, he stayed silent as the mustached operator moved the heavy electric helmet over his head.

He stayed silent for the eternal minute during which the man fiddled with the controls.

...and then, he stayed silent when the man put a gas mask full of Zilcex over his face.

At that point, he couldn't have said anything, even if he wanted to. Zilcex acts pretty quickly, it turns out. In a second, he felt his limbs become numb. He could have sworn that the operator was looming over him with an evil-looking grin during that brief instant. It could have been the effect of the drug, though. He couldn't tell, he had fallen in a coma right after.

"Fil! Hey FIL!!" A deep voice rang in Fil's ear.

Fil took off the brainlet and turned his head towards the source of the sound.
It was Livy, his good friend Livy, a slightly plump man with short black hair and a permanent grin on his face.

"I just got the scans from the control." Livy said, beaming with excitement.

"Neat."

"Wanna see?"

Fil burned to see the newly-collected data. They had spent months gathering a decent sample of non-autistic people and mapping their brains. The data was sent to a company for further processing and now, finally, the results were in.

Yet this longing for data, something that Fil would have accepted naturally a mere 4 months ago, seemed wrong, out of place.

Thus, with an apathetic expression, Fil replied: "Maybe later."
But the face did not fool Livy.

"What's up, Fil? You've not been yourself these past few weeks..."

Fil started opening his mouth to protest, to say that he hadn't changed, but he stopped himself. He could lie to himself, it turned out, but not to Livy.
"You're right." he said simply, marking his words with a long, deep sigh.

Livy inspected him carefully, then: "Hey, you know what? Let's go eat at Billy's Burgers tonight, for old time's sake."

Fil looked up. "Is that still open? I thought..."

"Yep. I've popped in there recently."

A smirk passed over Fil's face. "..with your diet?"

Livy offered a sheepish smile and for a moment his eyes almost seemed to be asking for forgiveness.

<< As if he's really sorry >> thought Fil.

"So?" asked Livy, a bit impatiently.

"What about..."

"Linda can take care of the kids."

"Fine."

Livy smiled. "Hey Fil, everything's gonna be fine, you hear?" he said, accompanying his words with a firm pat on Fil's back.

"Yeah." Fil answered, rather weakly.

With the conversation more-or-less finished, Livy headed for the door.
"I'll pass by at 7, remember!" Livy called on his way out and, just like that, he was gone.

Fil's brain urged him to continue work, but his heart spoke otherwise. He glanced at the clock. 5:33. He looked over to the cabinet right behind him. Will he dare? Why not. Yes, WHY THE HELL NOT!!
Resolved, he got up and reached for the cabinet's door handle. Twisting it, he opened the door. He paused. Inside was a dusty violin case. Memories filled his head. He didn't even need to open the case: he could see, he could feel, he could *hear* the violin.

Nevertheless, his trembling hands reached for the case. Slowly, he moved it onto his desk. Automatically, he reached for the case zipper. But then, he paused again. There was no excitement in his mind.

<< Still >>, he told himself, << it may come when I play >>. He knew that, really, it was unlikely, but he proceeded to open the case anyways. The violin inside was nothing special: he had better ones at home. This was, however, the first one he had laid hands on in a while.

He picked it up and rested his chin on the wood. His right hand enveloped the bow, while his left hand grasped the neck. He took a deep breath... and started playing. The skill had remained, but the joy had not. He played each note mechanically, without passion. And with each measure, as the motions became more and more unbearable, Fil struggled harder and harder to keep playing. Finally, Fil could stand it no more and let his hands fall. His body, no longer supported by his will, followed their lead.

Thus he remained, barely breathing, barely thinking, barely feeling. Was this truly the life he had wished for himself? It was so devoid of meaning, so lacking in emotions... how could this be called life at all?? So thus he remained slumped, empty, cold, on the heated floor.

The operator had lied: the operation hurt.

Fil's mind had completely drifted when he heard a knock. Livy stood in the door way.
    
"Yo Fil! Whatcha up to?"

Fil looked around, half-dazed. After a few, thoughtful seconds, he realized how strange he looked: he was sitting on the floor, in his office, with a bow in one hand and a violin in the other, lamenting himself.

"Oh, sorry. Hold on, I'll be ready in a sec." he said. Fil stooped up and put the violin away, softly laying it in its case. Though he didn't want to play it anymore, he still wished to take good care of it.

Livy watched the whole ordeal in silence, perhaps feeling that his friend would be disturbed by words.

Still, when they finally went out, the naturally talkative Livy could not handle the enduring silence anymore. So he began: "I didn't know you kept a violin at work."

"Sometimes, I just need a break from work..."

"So you play violin?"

Fil gave a sigh. "Usually."

"That's strange, I haven't heard you play at work before..."

"The door is soundproof."

"Oh."

A short silence followed, which Livy again burned to fill:
"Hey, you know, we haven't played together in a while."

Livy played the piano. He played rather well, as a matter of fact. In the past, before the operation, they used to play together every once in a while. Often, they would start with one of Beethoven's duets for violin and piano. Livy adored Beethoven. Fil loved the composer, but himself inclined towards Vivaldi. Thusly, they started with Beethoven but always ended up progressing towards Vivaldi. Following that, sometimes they improvised together, sometimes they played solos to each other, sometimes they played more by other composers (another favorite of theirs was the more modern Vierdak). It was never the same, but always invigorating.

But those times, to Fil, now seemed long gone: a relic of the distant past (though, in truth, the latest duet happened only 4 months ago).

Thus, his only reply was an unenthusiastic "yeah".

But Livy pushed: "Maybe we could do it again sometime."

"Yeah."

"Alright, Fil, what's up? What's going on? You and I both know there's something in the air here."

"Nothing."

"Is everything alright between you and Sam?"

"Yeah, we're fine."

"Then what IS it, Fil? What's bothering you?"

Livy was exasperated and this made Fil pause. Shall he tell him? ... but if he doesn't handle it well? But maybe it's worth telling someone? How much more trauma can his mind handle alone?
He began to open his mouth, about to reveal it all, but at the last moment, he changed his mind.

"Nothing, really!"

"Alright, don't tell me." Livy replied, unsatisfied. And out of spite, he stayed silent for the
whole way to the restaurant.

When they finally arrived at Billy's Burgers, made their orders and sat down, it was Fil who broke the silence.

"I went to Passion Shock."

"You - what?!!"

"You wanted to know what's been bothering me. Well, here you go: I went to Passion Shock."

Livy was incredulous: "*The* Passion Shock? The new business downtown, that messes with people's passions? What could you possibly..." Livy's brain, having gathered all the data, now just managed to make sense of it. "Oh."

"Yes. It's all too clear now, isn't it?" Fil mumbled, in a somewhat sarcastic tone.

"But why??! What about all those times we played together? You enjoyed them, didn't you? Why take them away?"

"I enjoyed them, you know that. In fact, that's exactly why I did it: I enjoyed them too much."

Fil left a brief silence hanging, but the shattered Livy had nothing to say. So, he continued:
"3 years ago, I published 4 papers. 2 years ago, just 2. Last year: one measly review. 'Why?' I asked myself: 'why?'
 
At first, I told myself that it was the environment, some lack of brains on my part, just luck. But really, I was dancing around the real issue. Throughout these years, the violin started taking more and more of my time. I remember 3 years ago, I used to come home and think about research, about my current problem. But this year, I've just been coming home, waxing my bow, and letting it vibrate the strings all night."

"So what!? You were still researching during the day, weren't you?"

"Not even! Right before I went to Passion Shock, I was either playing violin or thinking about it. Nothing else."

"...so you went..."

"Yeah..."

"Well?"

"What?"

"Do you feel any better now? Was it worth it?" Livy asked these questions in such a cynical manner that, for a moment, Fil was tempted to answer no: NO! IT WAS ABSOLUTELY COMPLETELY USELESS, Livy. Screw my life.

But he still had an ounce of argument left in him, so he suggested:
"The first two months went great. I was more productive than ever. In fact, that's when I had the idea to map autistic brains."

"Wasn't that *my* idea?"

"Whatever. You can't deny it: I WAS productive."

"Maybe then... but look where you are now. In another month-"

Fil interrupted him. "Yes I know. Goodness, I feel so dead. You know, I tried playing violin again today."

"And?"

"Nothing. I felt nothing."

At this, a grim silence fell over the table, giving each participant in the conversation time to think over what was said. Fil put his head down: sad, pitiful, hopeless, tired of life.

Eventually, Livy dared move the still air.

"Have you thought about rewiring your brain?"

Fil looked up. "About what?"

"Rewiring the brain. You'd - "

Livy didn't finish his sentence before hope filled Fil's eyes. The man now looked so excited that
Livy almost expected him to jump on the table and scream.

"Yes! Go to Passion Shock and ask to have my brain put back the way it was? That's it! It'll do! They map the whole brain before the operation, after all, to protect themselves from accidents. So I should be able to revert..." Attached to this idea, Fil continued mumbling about it for the rest of the night, half to himself, half to Livy.

Livy mumbled some sentence too. He repeated it to Fil throughout the night, but to his dismay, Fil did not pay attention (what a shame...).

In any case, it was getting late and Livy had a family to come back to. So, they exchanged quick good-byes (Fil, in his state, would not say much more) and parted ways.

The next day, Fil lost no time. Instead of showing up at his office, he found himself standing at Passion Shock's reception.

The company's information desk was not revolutionary, but certainly uncommon. There was no holographic attendant or any kind of help screen to navigate. Instead, there was a single circle of booths, each with what at first glance appeared to be a brainlet, connected by a wire to some mysterious machine inside the desk. They could have been wireless, of course, but the wires kept the customers honest (i.e. stopped them from stealing those helmets), or so the justification went.

In any case, Fil sat down at one of these booths and put a helmet on. This helmet was not a brainlet, at least not in the common sense. It was a specialized version created solely for providing information. At that, it was extremely efficient. Half a second after Fil put it on, it had scanned his brain and identified his problem. In another half second, it had programmed the answer into Fil's brain:

<< Fil, we're sorry but we cannot revert your brain: we only store each patient's brain for 2 weeks. Brain maps take up a lot of space and Passion Shock, as a relatively new business, cannot afford enough storage to store all brain maps indefinitely.

Again, we're sorry.

Thank you for doing business with Passion Shock. Have a nice day! >>

<< Typical business >> thought Fil.

<< Please voice your concerns and complaints by b-mail to "problems@passionshock.com". Thank you >>

With this, Fil took off the helmet, got up, and got out, leaving behind him both the building and his remaining hope.

At first, Fil headed home. But, as his last hope fled, it took his will with it. So, he simply sat down at a bench and waited.... Waited for what? He didn't know, he didn't care. He sat and watched life pass by: the self-driving cars, the walking people, the ever-changing city lights...

From the bench, life looked so simple: just eat, sleep, move, talk. But it was so much more! Long sought after dreams, constantly burbling passions, victories after chains of defeats... They made living worthwhile. And he killed them, killed all that made life worth enduring! Can you imagine?

And thus, Fil became more and more depressed. But amidst it all, his phone rang.

"Phone", "rang": What strange words!

Indeed, the "phones" of this century produced no sound at all, despite their names. These "phones" consisted of a simple band around the wrist which, through a feat of both electrical and neurological engineering, is able to interact with the brain, sending and receiving complex signals. Being placed around the wrist area, the signals consist mostly of hand and arm related stuff... normally. The key insight was that, using a brainlet, the brain could be rewired into interpreting those signals as text, allowing the modern phones to work (of course, to prevent the trick from interfering with normal hand and arm signals, only weak and normally insubstantial are interpreted). Thusly, people could simply communicate by thinking, helping make conversations quieter, more private (especially in public places), and often faster (as no sounds get in the way of speaking).

The phone did not truly "ring" anymore, either. Rather, it just sent a thought like, say: << Maïté is calling. >> It could also send messages back and forth. Depending on how you configured it, you could "hear" the messages as you received them, or check them at your leisure.

    In any case, what Fil got now was a thought saying << Sam is calling. >> He sighted and answered it.
<< Fil, dear! Where are you?? It's 4 in the morning! Why aren't you home? >> Sam began.

<< I don't feel like going home. >>

There was a short pause, then: << Is everything alright? >>

<< Yeah, I'm fine. >>

<< Are you really? >>

<< Yeah, yeah. >>

Sam sensed that it was pointless to ask further. << Well, take care then. And be back soon, you hear? >>

<< Yeah, you take care too. >>

Fil disconnected the line.

Another sigh. He hadn't even told Sam about his passion change. Sam and Livy were his 2 closest friends, and for 4 months, neither of them knew. He almost didn't tell Livy yesterday, either.

Since when has he had to keep secrets from them? And why doesn't he tell them, anyways? Does he not trust them?

No. No, it's not that. He's ashamed, that's what. He can barely tell it to himself!

...though perhaps he should tell Sam. It felt nice to tell Livy. For a moment there, he actually had some hope, too! But alas, it was all for nothing. Stupid Passion Shock, only storing brains for 2 weeks!!!

That's when Fil realized: Livy said something else that night. But what was it? If only he'd paid attention, instead of being so excited about his own stupid idea!

So, he called Livy.

<< Hey Livy... >>

<< Fil??!! What the hell do you want?! It's 4 in the morning!!! >>

<< Yeah, yeah. Hey, what were you trying to say yesterday? >>

<< Huh? >>

<< You were mumbling something... >>

<< Didn't you *listen*? >>

<< Oh please, just tell me! >>

<< Fine. I said "that's not what I meant" >>

<< I don't get it. >>

<< For rewiring your brain, I didn't mean going to Passion Shock. >>>

<< How did you want me to do it, then? >>

<< The old-fashioned way. >>

<< You mean -  >>

<< Yep. >> The connection closed: Livy wanted to sleep.

So Fil finally went back home. By the time he got back, Sam was already eating breakfast. After exchanging quick good-mornings, Fil went straight to his room. He took his violin out and started playing again.

This time, it went a bit better. Perhaps it was the familiarity of this room or perhaps it was because he had just played violin two days before.

The lack of feeling was ever present, but he found himself playing slightly longer than last time. When he finished playing after 15 minutes, he even sensed a small spark of joy.
He put the violin back in the case and... fell asleep. After all, he'd gotten no sleep at all the night before.

Over the next few months, Fil continued to practice violin every night, without fail. As he went on further and further, he found that, just as Livy had predicted, his brain was starting to rewire.
After the first month, he could make himself play for an hour. After two more months, he got it up to two hours. Two more months and it was 4.

A bit after that, he didn't have to make himself play at all. The joy of playing had finally come back!

Livy could see the change in Fil and, as a result, continued to ask him to play with him again.
One day, about a year after he started practicing again, Fil finally accepted.

He came over to Livy's house that night and they started playing. For some reason or other, that night, they decided to play Beethoven's Kreutzer Sonata.

The first movement started softly, innocently, then became furious, then soft again, then furious again, and on and on... Fil remembered how ambivalent he felt about the passion change, at first, how great it was to focus on work but how awful it had been to leave violin. He moved the bow with the fury he had felt then.

Then, they left a short silence, and Livy started the second movement. It was pensive, meditative, with outbursts of hope.

Finally, they got to the third movement, happy, exuberant, holding nothing back. Fil felt the passion overwhelm him as he played. Towards the end, a few drops of water streamed down from his eyes.

When they finished, Livy turned around and caught Fil's face.

"Is something wrong there, Fil?"

No, nothing was wrong. Everything was perfect. For these tears were not tears of sadness or self-pity, these were tears of joy. Pure joy.

